---
layout: post
title: Simulations - Highlights
joomla_id: 134
joomla_url: simulations
date: 2013-11-23 07:46:38.000000000 +00:00
---
<p>On this page we highlight some particularly interesting simulations, though this is by no means a complete list.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<h3>Links for SpEC simulations</h3>
<p>Looking for table of SPAWN runs? try the link below:</p>
<ul>
<li><a href="index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id=133&amp;Itemid=316" title="Selected simulations performed with the Spectral Einstein Code">Selected simulations performed with the Spectral Einstein Code</a></li>
</ul>
<h3>SpEC Simulations used to study general-relativistic field momentum, tendexes, and vortexes</h3>
<ul>
<li><a href="index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id=142&amp;Itemid=360" title="Head on Collision of Black Holes with Transvere Spins">Head on Collision of Black Holes with Transverse Spins</a></li>
<li><a href="inspiral95aa.html"> </a><a href="index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id=144&amp;Itemid=364" title="Insiprialling Collision of Black Holes with Anti-aligned Spins">Inspiralling Collision of Black Holes with Anti-aligned Spins</a></li>
<li><a href="index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id=145&amp;Itemid=365" title="&quot;Extreme-Kick&quot; Inspiral: Anti-aligned Spins in the Orbital Plane">"Extreme-Kick" Inspiral: Anti-aligned Spins in the Orbital Plane</a></li>
</ul>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<h3>Numerically generated gravitational waveforms</h3>
<h4>Equal-mass zero-spin binary: 15-orbit inspiral</h4>
<p>The 15-orbit inspiral waveform presented in the paper&nbsp;<a href="http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.76.124038" target="_blank">Boyle et al., Phys Rev. D 76, 124038 (2007)</a>&nbsp;can be found in&nbsp;<a href="PhysRevD_76_124038_Waveform.dat" target="_blank">this file</a>.<br /><br />This is an ordinary text file containing \(r*m*\Psi_4^{22}\) versus (retarded) time. Here \(r\) is the radius, \(m\) is the total irreducible mass as defined in our paper, and \(\Psi_4^{22}\) is the \(l=2\), \(m=2\) component of the Newman-Penrose quantity&nbsp;\(\Psi_4\) as measured by an observer at infinity. This is the highest-quality extrapolated-to-infinity numerical waveform underlying all our results in Section VI of the paper. The file contains some comments at the top (starting with a '#' character), and then three columns of numbers. If we write&nbsp;\(r*m*\Psi_4^{22} = A^{-i \phi}\), then the columns in the file are \(\frac{t-r^\star}{m}\), \(\phi\), and \(A\). The overall phase offset and time offset are arbitrary.<br /><br />Permission to use this waveform is granted as long as the user acknowleges the source of the waveform and cites the paper&nbsp;<a href="http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.76.124038" target="_blank">Boyle et al., Phys Rev. D 76, 124038 (2007)</a>. (This paper can also be found&nbsp;<a href="http://www.arxiv.org/abs/0710.0158" target="_blank">here</a>.)<br /><br /><br /><br /></p>
<h4>Equal-mass zero-spin binary: 16 orbits+merger+ringdown</h4>
<p>The 16-orbit Psi4 waveform for a zero-spin equal mass binary, as presented in the paper&nbsp;<a href="http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.79.024003" target="_blank">Scheel et al., Phys Rev. D 79, 024003 (2009)</a>&nbsp;can be found in&nbsp;<a href="PhysRevD_79_024003_Psi4Waveform.dat" target="_blank">this file</a>.<br /><br />This is an ordinary text file containing \(r*m*\Psi_4^{22}\) versus (retarded) time. Here&nbsp;\(r\) is the radius,&nbsp;\(m\) is the total initial irreducible mass as defined in our paper, and&nbsp;\(\Psi_4^{22}\) is the&nbsp;\(l=2\), \(m=2\) component of the Newman-Penrose quantity \(\Psi_4\) as measured by an observer at infinity. The file contains some comments at the top (starting with a '#' character), and then three columns of numbers:\(\frac{t-r^\star}{m}\), \(Re(r*m*\Psi_4^{22})\), and \(Im(r*m*\Psi_4^{22})\). The overall time shift and phase shift are arbitrary. This waveform corresponds to the highest-resolution (30c/N6 in the paper) \(\Psi_4\) waveform, extrapolated to infinity (using extrapolation order \(n=3\)). This is the same waveform shown in Fig. 11 in the paper.<br /><br />Permission to use this waveform is granted as long as the user acknowleges the source of the waveform and cites the paper&nbsp;<a href="http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.79.024003" target="_blank">Scheel et al., Phys Rev. D 79, 024003 (2009)</a>&nbsp;(This paper can also be found&nbsp;<a href="http://arxiv.org/abs/0810.1767" target="_blank">here</a>).<br /><br /></p>
