---
layout: post
title: Basic Joomla Concepts
joomla_id: 173
joomla_url: basic-joomla-concepts
date: 2014-10-17 02:19:29.000000000 +00:00
---
<p><strong>Joomla!</strong> is an open source <strong>Content Management System (CMS)</strong>, one of the big three along with Wordpress and Drupal. It allows one to create database driven websites that can be easily updated by people who are not professional web developers. Also, Joomla has <a href="http://extensions.joomla.org/" target="_blank">a large collection of "extensions"</a> (mostly free) that can extend the capability of the system beyond the default installation. The SXS website is built on top of Joomla! 2.5, the last version with long term support.</p>
<p>For the SXS Website, we also made use of the free <a href="http://gantry-framework.org/" target="_blank">Gantry Framework</a> which allowed us to create a design that is easily customizable. It comes with a basic template, with <a href="http://demo.gantry-framework.org/features/module-positions" target="_blank" title="predefined module &quot;Positions&quot;">predefined module "Positions"</a> for users to layout their website (eg, the sidebar position, header, footer). It is also <strong>responsive</strong>, meaning that a website built with this framework adapts to different screen sizes in a fluid manner. We have modified the basic Gantry template heavily when developing the design for SXS using our custom CSS/less files, custom images, as well as some modification to the PHP files.</p>
<h3>Some Useful Joomla! Terms</h3>
<dl class="dl-horizontal"><dt>Articles</dt><dd>Most of your Joomla content are in the form of <strong>Articles</strong>. You can create and edit your Articles in <strong>Content -&gt; Article Manager</strong>. For example, the content of this tutorial page is inside the article "Basic Joomla Concepts" under the category "Tutorials".</dd><dt>Categories</dt><dd>You can create different <strong>Categories</strong> to organize your Joomla Articles. This is also useful in the case when you want to create a blog or list layout, which will display all articles from the same category. For example, the "SXS News &amp; Updates" page is a "category blog layout" - it displays all articles that have been put into the category "SXS News &amp; Updates". You can access and manage Categories in <strong>Content -&gt; Category Manager</strong>. Categories can have different levels. For example, the category "Science" have five children categories - "Relativity", "Gravitational Wave Astronomy", "Numerical Relativity", "Compact Objects" and "Sources of Gravitational Waves". You can change the level of a category by choosing the "<strong>Parent</strong>" (drop down selector) of the category you are editing/creating.</dd><dt>Menus</dt><dd>An article is not visible on the website until a <strong>Menu</strong> item is created that points to the article (an analogy is domain name and website: a website is not accessible to the public until there is a domain name that points to it). You can create different Menus (eg, a Main Menu, Sidebar Menus) and Menu items (the actual links/pointers) under <strong>Menus</strong>. There are many options for menu items - for example, a single article, a blog layout of all articles in a category, an alias of other menu items, an external link etc. Just like categories, menu items can also have different levels. For example, "People" is a child item of "About SXS", "White Dwarfs" is a child item of "Compact Objects", and "Compact Objects" is itself a child category of "The Science".</dd><dt>Extensions</dt><dd>Extensions, as the name suggests, extends the capability of core Joomla. They can be in form of Components, Modules or Plug-ins. When you install Joomla, it comes with a pre-installed list of extensions, eg, search. You can download and install <a href="http://extensions.joomla.org/" target="_blank">extra extensions (only install extensions compatible for Joomla 2.5)</a> to add functionality to your website. To install an extension, go to <strong>Extensions -&gt; Extension Manager -&gt; Install</strong>. To manage an existing extension, go to&nbsp;<strong>Extensions -&gt; Extension Manager -&gt; Manage</strong>. Sometimes, after you install a new extension, you have to manually change its status to "active". We recommend to always back up before you install a new extension. Also, only install popular extensions that are highly rated.</dd><dt>Components</dt><dd>Components are the functional units of Joomla. Some come with the default installation, and some you can download and install to extend the capability of the system. For example, the JCE Editor (article text editor) is a component that we installed to replace the default Joomla article editor. You can access Components by going to <strong>Components</strong> in the admin menu.</dd><dt>Modules</dt><dd>This is what Joomla! calls the "widgets". For example, the Search bar, "Our Latest Tweet" and "Upcoming Events" widgets on the SXS website are all modules. You can access modules by going to <strong>Extensions -&gt; Module Manager</strong>. Most of the existing modules have been configured for use on the SXS site and we recommend the admin to not change some of the critical settings unless it is necessary. However, there are exceptions - for example, we have cover in another tutorial on <a href="index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id=156&amp;Itemid=415" title="changing out the &quot;Featured Video&quot; module">changing out the "Featured Video" module</a> on the sidebar.</dd><dt>Plug-ins</dt><dd>Plug-ins add functionality to Joomla in the background. For example, we have installed the Core Design Glossary Plugin to make glossary/tooltip creation an easy process for this site, and we have an email cloaking plug-in to protect any email addresses on the website from spambots. You can see a list of installed plug-ins by going to <strong>Extensions -&gt; Plug-in Manager</strong>.</dd><dt>Templates</dt><dd>If you go to <strong>Extensions -&gt; Template Manager</strong>, you will see a list of installed templates for the site. There are two active templates - <strong>Gantry</strong> (the frontend template, the framework that we use) and <strong>Bluestork</strong> (the default backend template for the admin panel). <a href="http://demo.gantry-framework.org/" target="_blank">Gantry is the basic template/framework</a> that we modified heavily into the SXS website's current design. We kept the other templates that came with the default Joomla installation. This can be useful, since an update to an active template could possibly break the site, in that case, you can switch to your back up template to troubleshoot.</dd><dt>Users</dt><dd>An administrator in Joomla can add or remove user accounts. For the SXS site, I remove the capability for people to sign up for an account themselves, as this will prevent spambots from signing up completely. To add/edit users, go to <strong>Users -&gt; User Manager</strong>. Admins can also assign different levels of access privileges to different users.</dd></dl>
